---
layout: defaults
title: Data Model V1
published: true
---
This document describes the v1 Tidepool data formats. Well, a sub-set of them right now, anyway. But it will have all of them soon.

All events in the Tidepool platform are JSON-formatted. They all share a "type" field that defines the type of the event. The semantics of the other fields in the events are generally defined individually per type, but there are some common fields defined below.

The defined fields for an event type are a minimal set of fields that should be set, all event types can have any number of extra fields on them. This is to allow for a bit of flexibility in changes to the data model. There is also a `grabbag` type that exists purely for free-form definition of data types. Note that Tidepool is reserving the right to introduce and define the semantics for any field on a non-`grabbag` event. So, if you do choose to attach an extra field onto an event for individualized purposes, it will be in your own best interest to give it a name that is not likely to collide with a field we might choose to define in the future.

## Data Types

* [Activity](activity)
* [Basals](basal)
* [Boluses](bolus)
* [Continuous Glucose (cbg)](cbg)
* [Device Metadata](device-meta)
* [Food](food)
* [Grab Bag](grabbag)
* [Ketones](ketones)
* [Note](notes)
* [Self-monitoring Glucose (smbg)](smbg)
* [Settings](settings)
* [Upload](upload)
* [Wizard](wizard)

## Common Fields

### time

An ISO8601 timestamp with a timezone offset.

### deviceId

An indication of the device that generated the datum. This should be globally unique to this device and repeatable with each upload. A device make and model with serial number, shortened, is a good value to include here. Examples:

* `"deviceId": "aviva-53543975796"` - It was taken from an Aviva BG meter with SN#53543975796
* `"deviceId": "InsOmn130028848"` -- It was taken from an Insulet OmniPod with serial number 130028848

Please see the [docs for upload records](upload) for more information on deviceId.

### uploadId

The upload identifier; this field should be the uploadId of the corresponding [upload](upload) data record.

Note that uploadId does not figure in the calculations of a record id. This is so that multiple uploads of the same records will compare equal.

### source -- DEPRECATED

This field was originally defined in every data record. However, it has not proven useful and has proven to be confusing. It will still appear in older data records (where it was used to differentiate data that came from CareLink vs data that came from Tidepool's upload tools), but newer ones will not use it.


### previous

Some data types have a `previous` field.  This field is used to indicate what the previous event in the given event's stream should be.  This can always be specified as one of two things:
* The exact JSON of the previous event as it would have been submitted to the Tidepool platform
* The id of the event that was generated after submission to the Tidepool platform

## Extra Fields

### timezoneOffset

The `timezoneOffset` field can be attached to any of the events detailed here. It specifies the timezone offset in minutes that was used to convert the timestamp for that specific datum from the device. The timezone offset is the number of minutes that should be added (can be a negative number) to a UTC timestamp to generate "local" time.

A significant number of diabetes devices (read: all that Tidepool is currently aware of) do not maintain an accurate UTC timestamp; instead they only provide the local time. This means that when you change the time on the device due to changes in timezone, you are actually changing the time that your data is getting associated with. This provides the user with a basic indication of what time it is when things are happening, but it actually makes it very difficult to accurately correlate data sets from disparate sources.

When dealing with these data sets, the time provided *must* be turned into an ISO8601 timestamp string with a timezone offset (or, as Tidepool currently does for device data, into Zulu time/UTC with a timezone offset of 0) before being sent into the Tidepool platform. This conversion can be faulty; it is most simply done by asking the user what timezone their data is in and applying that across the board. Furthermore, different conversion libraries deal with invalid timestamps in different ways (where an "invalid" timestamp is, for example, 2:30 a.m. on March 9th, 2014 because the switch to DST in the United States happened at 2:00 a.m. on March 9th, 2014, and the clock rolled directly to 3:00 a.m.). Hence although the `timezoneOffset` field is not a required field, it is a good idea to include the `timezoneOffset` that was used to convert from device time to UTC time.

This provides two benefits:

1. Visualizations on top of the data have the ability to reverse the transformation that was initially performed, if they so choose.
2. If a user knows that they took a trip to, e.g., New York for a week and their timezone needs to be updated, a tool can be created to re-adjust the timezone by first reversing the transformation and then adjusting the time according to the new timezone.

### deviceTime

The `deviceTime` field can be attached to any of the events detailed here. Similar to `timezoneOffset`, it is a nod to dealing with the current state of diabetes devices and the fact that they are timezone agnostic. This should be the timestamp given from the device in ISO8601 format without any timezone offset specified - i.e., the format `YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss` (example: '2014-01-01T00:00:00' to represent device time of midnight on January 1st, 2014).

This field is intended to exist only for auditing purposes to show what the timestamp was initially. It *should* be the case that combining the `timezoneOffset` with the `time` field should produce this exact same string. However, it will be possible at some point to mutate data points and adjust the timestamp if it was incorrect (e.g., you were travelling and the timezone used for conversion is incorrect). In these cases, it is possible and expected that some data points might not line up with the stated `deviceTime` anymore.

### units

Read about units below.

### createdTime

There is a `creationTime` field that is auto-generated on all events. This is the machine time that the event was first created.

### modifiedTime

There is a `modifiedTime` field that is auto-generated on all events that have been modified. This is the machine time of the most recent modification of the event.

### payload

Any object can have a "payload", which is itself an object with any number of unspecified fields. This is used to store device-specific data that doesn't rise to the level of standard, but that is useful to store. For example, the Dexcom G4 continuous glucose monitor displays "trend arrows", which are arrows that indicate the general direction of the change in glucose readings -- up, down, flat. This information is stored under payload.trend.

### annotations

Events can be annotated to indicate various weird and "anomalous" states for the events.  These are described in more detail at [Annotations](annotations)

## Units

NOTE: we wish we had chosen a better name for this field -- something like "displayUnits". Sorry.

The Tidepool platform processes and stores blood glucose data ONLY in `mmol/L` format. We chose `mmol/L` because it is the standard unit for international research and because, as a floating point number, it can be converted accurately to mg/dL, which is typically an integer. The reverse would not be true.

Event types that include a blood glucose reading should also have a units field specified. When that field is `mg/dL`, we will convert the value to `mmol/L` and store the result. *The `units` field will be preserved, but the numerical values will always be in `mmol/L`.*

Repeat: all numerical values for blood glucose data on the Tidepool platform are in `mmol/L`. However, the `units` field describes the data value that was uploaded to the platform originally, and it can serve as a hint for how the data should be displayed on download.

This is why it might have been a better idea to call it "displayUnits".

The algorithm followed for conversion is

1. If units field exists and is `mg/dL`
2. Divide the value by 18.01559 [(the molar mass of glucose is 180.1559 g/mol)](http://www.convertunits.com/molarmass/Glucose)
3. Store floating-point precision value without any rounding or truncation

## Duplicate Events

If a duplicate event is submitted to the Tidepool platform, it will be ignored.  A duplicate event is defined as any event that results in the same generated id.  Ids are generated automatically by the system based on a different set of fields for each type of event, but at a minimum, a duplicate event will have the same timestamp.

At some future date, we will have the ability to modify events.  At that time, there will be a special endpoint that allows for updating an event and in this case, it is expected that an id will be provided.

## Versioning and Updates

Some activities can cause an event to be updated.  Indeed, we intend for the Tidepool platform to actually allow for full mutation of all events stored inside of it.  In order to maintain an audit trail of what has changed in the data during these mutations, we have opted to take a multi-versioned approach to storing data.

In general, the details of this system are completely hidden to a user of the platform, but it can be important to understand how it works in order to convince yourself that the Tidepool platform is a safe place to store your health data.

The basic tenet of our multi-versioned approach is that for all datums, we add the following fields:

* `createdTime` - The server timestamp of when the original datum was created
* `modifiedTime` - The server timestamp of when the current datum was created (which is the equivalent of a "modification" to the original datum)
* `_sequenceId` - A "version" for the datum.  The original datum will have a `_sequenceId = 0`, the next modification will be 1, and so on
* `_active` - A flag that enables "tombstoning" of events.  Or, the effective deletion of a datum without altering the history.

By maintaining these fields and "stacking" events on top of each other we can always expose the "most recent" event, but still maintain the entire history of that event inside of our platform.  At the time of writing of this documentation, we have implemented this versioning methodology, but have not yet implemented endpoints that allow for accessing datums that are `_active == false`.

At some point in the future, there will be methods of accessing these datums and at that time, this documentation should be updated.  If you notice that we have the method of accessing but are currently reading this documentation, please at least alert someone to the fact that the docs are out of date and/or provide a pull request to the docs to bring them up to date.
