---
layout: defaults
title: Data Model V1
published: true
---
This document describes the v1 Tidepool data formats. Well, a sub-set of them right now, anyway. But it will have all of them soon.

All events in the Tidepool platform are JSON-formatted. They all share a "type" field that defines the type of the event. The semantics of the other fields in the events are generally defined individually per type, but there are some common fields defined below. 

The defined fields for an event type are a minimal set of fields that should be set, all event types can have any number of extra fields on them. This is to allow for a bit of flexibility in changes to the data model. There is also a `grabbag` type that exists purely for free-form definition of data types. Note that Tidepool is reserving the right to introduce and define the semantics for any field on a non-`grabbag` event. So, if you do choose to attach an extra field onto an event for individualized purposes, it will be in your own best interest to give it a name that is not likely to collide with a field we might choose to define in the future.

## Data Types

* [Basals](./v1/basal.html)
* [Boluses](./v1/bolus.html)
* [Continuous Glucose (cbg)](./v1/cbg.html)
* [Device Metadata](./v1/deviceMeta.html)
* [Food](./v1/food.html)
* [Grab Bag](./v1/grabbag.html)
* [Self-monitoring Glucose (smbg)](./v1/smbg.html)
* [Settings](./v1/settings.html)
* [Wizard](./v1/wizard.html)

## Common Fields

### time

An ISO8601 timestamp with a timezone offset.

### deviceId

An indication of the device that generated the datum. This should be globally unique. A device make and model with serial number is a good value to include here.

### source

The original source of the data. This is something like `diasend` if the data came from Diasend, `carelink` if from Carelink, `device` if it came directly from a device, etc.

This is primarily used for annotative and informational purposes. When creating a new method of entering data into Tidepool, please contact us about what value would make the most sense to set for the source field.

### previous

Some data types have a `previous` field.  This field is used to indicate what the previous event in the given event's stream should be.  This can always be specified as one of two things:
* The exact JSON of the previous event as it would have been submitted to the Tidepool platform
* The id of the event that was generated after submission to the Tidepool platform

## Extra Fields

### timezoneOffset

The `timezoneOffset` field can be attached to any of the events detailed here. It specifies the timezone offset in minutes that was used to convert the timestamp for that specific datum from the device. The timezone offset is the number of minutes that should be added (can be a negative number) to a UTC timestamp to generate "local" time.

A significant number of diabetes devices (read: all that Tidepool is currently aware of) do not maintain an accurate UTC timestamp; instead they only provide the local time. This means that when you change the time on the device due to changes in timezone, you are actually changing the time that your data is getting associated with. This provides the user with a basic indication of what time it is when things are happening, but it actually makes it very difficult to accurately correlate data sets from disparate sources.

When dealing with these data sets, the time provided *must* be turned into an ISO8601 timestamp string with a timezone before being sent into the Tidepool platform. This conversion can be faulty (it is most simply done by asking the user what timezone their data is in and applying that across the board), so when this is done, the name of the timezone that was used (as found in the [IANA Time Zone Database](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tz_database)) should be attached to the event on the `timezone` field.

This provides two benefits

1. Visualizations on top of the data have the ability to reverse the transformation that was initially performed, if they so choose.
2. If a user knows that they took a trip to, e.g., New York for a week and their timezone needs to be updated, a tool can be created to re-adjust the timezone by first reversing the transformation and then adjusting the time according to the new timezone.

### deviceTime

The `deviceTime` field can be attached to any of the events detailed here. Similar to `timezoneOffset`, it is a nod to dealing with the current state of diabetes devices and the fact that they are timezone agnostic. This should be the timestamp given from the device in ISO8601 format without any timezone offset specified.

This field is intended to exist only for auditing purposes to show what the timestamp was initially. It *should* be the case that combining the timezone offset with the *time* field and throwing away the timezone should produce this exact same string. However, it will be possible at some point to mutate data points and adjust the timestamp if it was incorrect (e.g., you were travelling and the stated timezone is incorrect). In these cases, it is possible and expected that some data points might not line up with the stated `deviceTime` anymore.

### units

Read about units below.

### createdTime

There is a `creationTime` field that is auto-generated on all events. This is the machine time that the event was first created.

### modifiedTime

There is a `modifiedTime` field that is auto-generated on all events that have been modified. This is the machine time of the most recent modification of the event.

### annotations

Events can be annotated to indicate various weird and "anomalous" states for the events.  These are described in more detail at [Annotations](./v1/annotations.html)

## Units

The Tidepool platform processes blood glucose data in `mmol/L` format. We chose `mmol/L` because it is the standard unit for international research.

Most event types that include a blood glucose reading can also have a units field specified. When that field is `mg/dL`, we will convert the value to `mmol/L` and store the result. The units field will be preserved, but the numerical values will all be in `mmol/L`. The algorithm followed for conversion is

1. If units field exists and is `mg/dL`
2. Divide the value by 18.01559 [(the molar mass of glucose is 180.1559 g/mol)](http://www.convertunits.com/molarmass/Glucose)
3. Store floating-point precision value without any rounding or truncation

If you disagree with the conversion algorithm, the HTTP API allows you to attach a query parameter `noUnitConversion` to your event submission. When this is set, the conversion algorithm will be skipped with the expectation that you have already done the conversion.

## Duplicate Events

If a duplicate event is submitted to the Tidepool platform, it will be ignored.  A duplicate event is defined as any event that results in the same generated id.  Ids are generated automatically by the system based on a different set of fields for each type of event, but at a minimum, a duplicate event will have the same timestamp.  

At some future date, we will have the ability to modify events.  At that time, there will be a special endpoint that allows for updating an event and in this case, it is expected that an id will be provided.

## Versioning and Updates

Some activities can cause an event to be updated.  Indeed, we intend for the Tidepool platform to actually allow for full mutation of all events stored inside of it.  In order to maintain an audit trail of what has changed in the data during these mutations, we have opted to take a multi-versioned approach to storing data.

In general, the details of this system are completely hidden to a user of the platform, but it can be important to understand how it works in order to convince yourself that the Tidepool platform is a safe place to store your health data.

The basic tenet of our multi-versioned approach is that for all datums, we add the following fields:

* `createdTime` - The server timestamp of when the original datum was created
* `modifiedTime` - The server timestamp of when the current datum was created (which is the equivalent of a "modification" to the original datum)
* `_sequenceId` - A "version" for the datum.  The original datum will have a `_sequenceId = 0`, the next modification will be 1, and so on
* `_active` - A flag that enables "tombstoning" of events.  Or, the effective deletion of a datum without altering the history.

By maintaining these fields and "stacking" events on top of each other we can always expose the "most recent" event, but still maintain the entire history of that event inside of our platform.  At the time of writing of this documentation, we have implemented this versioning methodology, but have not yet implemented endpoints that allow for accessing datums that are `_active == false`.  

At some point in the future, there will be methods of accessing these datums and at that time, this documentation should be updated.  If you notice that we have the method of accessing but are currently reading this documentation, please at least alert someone to the fact that the docs are out of date and/or provide a pull request to the docs to bring them up to date.