---
layout: defaults
title: Food V1
published: true
---
# Food

Food events represent the ingestion of carbohydrates, protein, fat and other nutrients.  Even though food is actually consumed over a period of time, food events in the Tidepool platform are point-in-time events that are supposed to indicate that food was consumed around that time.  This is because food events are generated by human interaction and requiring both a start and end for the interaction is just unneeded friction.

A food event looks like

~~~json
{
  "type": "food",
  "time": see_common_fields,
  "carbs": grams_of_carbs,
  "protein": grams_of_protein,
  "fat": grams_of_fat,
  "location": location_of_meal,
  "name": name_of_food,
  "uploadId": see_common_fields
}
~~~

`location` is intended to be able to provide information like a restaurant, home, etc.  We will hopefully be able to expand on uses of it in the future, for now we list it merely to reserve it.

`food` is intended to contain the name of whatever was consumed.  It could be the contents of a meal from a restaurant, or a personally-meaningful name of a meal.  As with `location`, the exact semantics and uses of this are as yet undefined, but we are reserving the field.

Other nutrients can also be tracked with `food` events.  They should just be added with the name of the nutrient ("sodium", "potassium", "vitamin d", etc.) and stored with the "standard" unit of measure (as defined by the US FDA) for that nutrient (mg for sodium, IU for vitamin-d, etc).

## Storage/Output Format

The storage and output format for this datum is exactly what was initially ingested.  There are no modifications performed